hello and welcome a line from one of my
favorite stories as a child we have so
much time and so little to see wait
strike that reverse it Willy Wonka from
Charlie and the Chocolate Factory let me
roll up my sleeves here because we do
have a lot to talk about today and I'd
like to get started let me give you a
brief outline of what the story was
basically for the first time in a decade
Willy Wonka an eccentric reclusive
chocolate maker opens his factory doors
to the public five lucky children who
find a golden ticket in their wonk of
chocolate bars receive a private tour of
the factory run by Willy Wonka and his
crew of loyal and Palombo workers now
I'm not going to tell you who Willy
Wonka is at our chocolate factory but
consider me your Oompa Loompa guide to
the wild and wonderful world of font
management on Mac OS the factory doors
are open let's begin with a definition
of font management from a user's
perspective it consists of installing
activating and deactivating fronts for
use in any number of applications
including page layout programs web
browsers and even the humble text editor
from a developer's standpoint it
consists of a programming interface for
accessing and modifying a central
repository of font data application
developers use it to create standard
user interface elements like the font
panel or the font menu they also use it
to to map a user selection to a
reference that can be passed to the
graphic system to render text on the
display or on other graphics devices
like the printer now the evolution of
thought management on Mac OS has can be
divided actually into two distinct
periods the first period is marked by a
long series of incremental change
to a design that has remained
fundamentally unchanged since the
introduction of the Macintosh in 1984
the second period is characterized by a
transition a transition to Apple type
services it's a completely new font
architecture that was designed from the
beginning as a industrial strength font
database management system now the key
point of this session today is that this
transition as of Mac OS 10 is complete
what you'll learn are the things as a
developer that you'll need to do to take
advantage of the features provided by
this new font architecture and also what
steps you'll need to do to remove
dependencies on the old model which has
completely gone away on Mac OS 10
traditionally the responsibility for
managing fonts resides with the font
folder and the finder which in turn
depends on the resource manager and the
font manager to populate the database
and manage that information this design
relies heavily on the resource manager
which was never intended or designed to
handle the data retrieval and storage
needs of most professional font
collections what third parties and font
management utility developers have done
is to reverse engineer the underlying
implementation they also implement their
own auxiliary font management systems
all of which has to be synchronized with
the central database through system
patches undocumented routines and
internal data structures of the font
manager and resource manager
now the existing implementation for
managing the font files is a descendant
of the original font desk accessory
mover which let users manipulate the
contents of a monolithic system food
case file with the development of true
type fonts were no longer to fit Matt
fonts that could fit within the system
suitcase files they became larger more
complex and more numerous as people
began to adopt them when the
functionality of the mover was
integrated with the finder the font
manager and the resource manager were
modified to create the illusion of a
single system suitcase file from a
multitude of font files located within
the font folder third-party developers
again as I mentioned before reverse
engineered some of this implementation
and figured out what was happening and a
lot of it was actually documented openly
with an inside Mac and they created
system patches that didn't necessarily
work together very well they duplicated
functionality that was eventually
developed within the system itself and
we're very fragile to changes within the
implementation of the operating system
some examples of these font management
utilities include Adobe type manager
font reserve master juggler and food
case these font management utilities
really came about because they are
designed to address some of the inherent
limitations in the system suitcase model
first and foremost we have the
limitation that all fonts must be
referenced to font resources and the
font suitcase file an example of how
this affects the regular user is Adobe
type manager and requirement that post
could type 1 fonts even though they
stood alone as separate outline files
that ATM could render and display on
screen required a dummy font suitcase
file with at least one bitmap file in
there that was never really used to
represent each outline font that was
available in addition to this only a
fixed number of files can be installed
in the fonts folder for use by the font
management system on Mac OS most thought
management utilities work around this
limitation by allowing users to activate
and deactivate selectively sets the font
since these font resources must coexist
in the research chain as part of the
system suitcase file the font manager
and resource manager become involved in
resolving conflicts in the font resource
identifiers and names these changes
these are actually physical changes to
the font resources need to be
communicated to the font manager through
physical changes within the font files
themselves if you've ever double clicked
on a font suitcase file in the system
folder and then took a look at it later
you might have noticed that the
modification date has actually changed
even though you didn't do anything to it
even though there's a user interface to
actually move files in and out a lot of
times what happened was an ID conflict
had actually been resolved and your file
has changed there are obviously concerns
about maintaining the validity of your
font data because of this so we want to
move to a model where font data is not
touched and finally any changes within
the fonts folder are often not
communicated to applications that are
currently running you would have to shut
down your applications and restart them
to see these changes
now beginning with mac OS 8.5 the
release of apple type services for
unicode imaging that's a mouthful it's
Atsui for short or 80s for the
underlying subsystem it introduced the
text rendering engine and font
management model that was designed to
handle large collections of fonts and to
handle multiple font formats and file
packaging models the font manager and
quick draw text at that time were
rewritten to integrate the 80s glyphs
cash a central cache of information
related to the fonts and the font file
and data management system as an adjunct
to the system suitcase model of the
resource manager Mac OS 9 point oh we
introduced an extent extended set of
functions to the font manager that
allowed developers for the first time to
make use of some of the lower level
functionality of atf by the way one
thing that i want to make clear is that
this extended font manager functionality
was available both on mac OS 9.0
straight and in carbon lib the first
release of carbon lives on mac OS 10
we've been busy porting 80s to a client
server implementation and we've been
standardizing the programming interface
in coordination with the other component
frameworks of the operating system
now the main goal of the design of 80s
was the replacement of the resource
manager with 80s as the principal
intermediary to the font database the
design also allows us to hide the
implementation from third-party
developers by providing a programming
interface for accessing and modifying
the standard font collection by
transferring the responsibility for
managing the font files parsing the font
formats and resolving name and
identifier conflicts we've allowed these
modifications to be handled dynamically
through internal data structures of HS
and plot manager rather than through
exposed data structures through the
resource manager this information is
made available to third-party developers
through the font axis and data
management programming interface of the
new extended font manager and 80s
another aspect of this design is the
font format independence and also for
handling different storage models what
we've done is we've consolidated the
wave fonts get packaged essentially font
data may be stored in the standard what
you might be familiar with this SS NT is
the tag that we use in the research
manager in the past a standard SF NT
directory and data table model that was
developed for truetype and also has been
adopted for the open type packaging
model from Adobe and Microsoft one last
thing is that performance has been
improved through the use of data
structures and heuristics that are
optimized for font management within ATS
and this works on multiple platforms and
operating systems we have support on Mac
OS 9 and on Mac OS 10
in terms of implementing HTS itself at
the core of the architecture lies the
open font architecture which provides a
programming interface and a protocol for
communicating with these modular font
scalars essentially the font scalars are
responsible for parsing and interpreting
the font data that's specific to a
particular font technology like true
type or post groups the font scalars
participate in measuring and rendering
texts and translating the font data into
a canonical format that can be used on
different graphic systems the 80s glyphs
cache is shared by all clients of a GF
and is designed for high throughput of
the font data especially in support of
large glyph reporters that are used in
Asian font the font database uses also
references to font files that may be
closed as needed in order to conserve
valuable system resources and also just
to allow you to handle response without
keeping them open like they were in the
past and the resource manager there's
also thanks to this no defined
predefined limit to the number of font
files that may be open or active in
reference through a PS at any single
time and finally on Mac OS 10 the
clients server implementation of atf
allows us to further reduce the load on
the system by sharing more of the common
data structures and common components
now as you can see in this diagram
there's no sign of the resource manager
in it in this particular implementation
this probably represents what you see on
Mac OS 10 as of DP for we have
applications and utilities linking
directly to an ApS client library which
then communicates to the AF server which
in turn handles the low-level details of
the font formats and packaging models on
various file systems or even across the
network applications and utilities may
also linked to a particular graphic
system by quick draw which is
represented through the font man there's
your API or courts to access their font
data in a style that's closer to what is
used on that graphic system underneath
all of this though however these graphic
systems also are clients of the 80s
server and parts of the 80s client
library to make use of font data this
abstraction layer allows us to change
formats or support formats actually as
needed as things come along now a
fundamental assumption in 80s is that
all font data can be logically contained
with within one of these SS NT directory
and data table structures this happens
to be as I mentioned before the natives
storage model for true type and opentype
fonts as such each font has a format
identifier a directory describing the
data tables that are present in the font
and a collection of data tables the
format support include true types and
postscript and within postscript itself
there are a multitude of variants we
also support classic postscript outline
fonts the CFS format fonts which are
used in opentype CID keyed to bite font
formats or the font format for cid seed
funds and other legacy formats in
leading the OCS font format that one
we're actually working on right now so
it's not available in DP for and we're
working on open type support also one
thing that we've had as a requirement
was support for font file formats from
other operating systems an example of
this is the Microsoft to type ttc or
TTFN data fork files this becomes much
simpler with the font management model
provided by ATF the storage models that
we intend to support include although
these aren't completely guaranteed of
course true type and PostScript fonts
suitcases and font resources opentype
OTF and true type ttc and pts files as
something we are working on and with the
emphasis on PDF data structures and file
formats within the new quartz graphic
system we also are working really hard
with the core graphics teams to get PDS
embedded font data working properly so
that means a PDF with embedded data
should work transparently on your Mac
os10 system
the programming interface to 80s let's
application and system developers
integrate many of the enhancements that
have evolved over time a lot of these
features were provided through the font
management utilities I described earlier
and also have been proposed or have been
integrated in part in the finder and
fonts folder model now some of these
features are actually not available at
present time in the finder they include
the ability to maintain farms and
locations outside of a single directory
associated directly with the operating
system the fonts folder in the classic
world users also like to create and
manage sets of fonts customized for
different applications this is something
that you often do see with font
management utilities they also want to
be able to open and close fonts while
working in the middle of an application
and have those fonts immediately
available they don't want to have to
shut down their applications and finally
some utilities also provides ability to
share fonts over network which we are
actually providing transparently on Mac
OS pin through these programs to these
AP eyes and the ATF architecture one
last thing that we're working on is
we're coordinating an effort with a high
level toolbox team and the apt-get team
to standardize on a user interface for
managing fonts this might integrate some
of the features within the font panel
that you've seen before and the
traditional font menu that you're all
familiar with
at this point I'd like to introduce my
fellow comrade in arms from the type
team Julio Gonzalez who will demo for
you some of the features that 80's makes
possible and also some of the features
that are actually already implemented in
DP for or a plan for the retail release
of Mac OS 10 beautiful good evening I
want to start by talking and showing you
the different locations for the fun
directory journalists in the first
location the 80s system knows about is
the system library fonts location here
we have the fonts that are required for
the basic operation of the operating
system full of some fonts that
traditionally with ship with next
directory that the 80s system knows
about is the local fonts directory this
location is the ideal spot for fun
collections to get installed into not so
the system directory which is exclusive
for apple's use the next in Turkey it
knows about is a network directory
unfortunately i'm not in the network i
can show it to you but this is the ideal
spot for say a company white font that
is used in internal documents the last
directory that it knows about is the
users font directory basically this ones
are only available to the user is
currently logged in but the beauty of
this directory is that if the home
directory resides over the network if
you log in on a different machine the
fonts go along with you now let me show
you some of the new features that we
have on OS 10 this is a the current
version of simple text that are shipping
with the CDs that you all receive it's
basically a carbon is applica person of
simple text it doesn't do much in as far
as using the new API so if we look at
the fonts menu
this font menu is built using a pen rest
menu this is what you're all familiar
with it's just the afforded list of
fonts are currently installing the
system now are taking the same version
of simple text and modified it to use
some new AP is that were introduced in
carbon lip 1.0 that allow you to create
a new manual one of the advantages is
that you can have a hierarchical menu
it's more compact it provides more
information so here you see the sub
menus which show you the weights and
stresses that accompany this font family
not so with the old version which in
fact if we take a look at barnard modern
which has an entry for each one of the
stylist or waiting stresses that it can
handle so the new menu is more compact
and more informative another feature of
this menu that is not rarely seen is
automatic want activation what do I mean
by that typically on mac OS 9 save you
wanted to install a font you would
install it into the fonts folder any
running application would have to quit
and and restart for you to be able to
see or use it now if i go back here to
my disk pick up a font drop it into my
users font directory and make sure that
it got copied there that's the usage
font directory go back to the modified
version of simple text and hello oh not
the point that i wanted to use but let's
pick up a nicer one here yeah sorry
about that
picked up the one below or but one of us
so if we head back Lenny unclutter some
of the mess here there it is so we
didn't have to put the application in
order to see the font and only that of
course we can hopefully use it so that's
an improvement of over what we've had in
or it's not another thing that you can
do with this on activation is what Robin
talked about is you can activate now
fonts anywhere outside of the scope of
word the system knows to look at so that
gives us a few advantages for example
applications that want to ship with
their own fonts typically applications
have had to install fonts from the font
folder or have shipped with the fun
suitcases inside of the resource port of
the application that second option of
course not doable understand because we
divorced from the font from the resource
manager all together and we no longer
look at the resource manager 45 so but
you can still install the funds into any
of the known locations the user local or
network directories which by the way you
can you can get at using find folder the
same way that you would on the yeah on
their mac OS classic mac OS just by
calling find folder with some new
constants are provided so a better way
would be to ship the fonts that the
application wishes to use along with the
application so that's what I've done
with this version of our simple text if
I go back to this and show the version
of simple text I have a font folder that
lives right along it it's got a chest
font here that I'm going to demonstrate
and the directories just at the same
level as the application at that as it
launches it looks for this fonts
directory in the same spot as it is and
activates a font so if i go back here to
the modified version of simple text here
is that font that has been activated so
i can too
and use it in queen so that is a cleaner
way of doing it but let me just let me
just talk about this a little bit more
this is not the most clean way of doing
it here the finder is showing us a
simple text application as an icon that
we can double click on in reality this
is this is a package a directory
structure inside of this structure is a
content directory for example and this
would be the ideal spot to put your font
directory and that way as you copy the
finder around moving around to another
location your fonts would be copied
alongside it so now how about activating
all the funds on the system I have a
tool here that allows us to do just that
let me bring it up it just shows the
glyphs that that the current font needs
or or have let me also bring up the
front panel this is the standard UI
under mac OS 10 for the font panel and
this or the sponsor are available under
it at the moment so i have a menu item
here that will allow me to activate any
directory that i have on this so i have
here a set of a demo direct demo fonts
and please watch closely the front panel
underneath it as i activate that
directory boom here we go we have now a
bunch of fonts that we can now use this
was a font that was not there it's up
you know updates on the background Apple
government was also not there so you can
imagine you know now we can you can have
a user have a set of directories and
organize your fonts in whatever way they
wish to use them and you as a developer
provide at you I that lets them pick any
of these any of these folders to
activate or deactivate on the fly now
for the purpose of this demo when we use
the activation routine that Robin is
going to talk to you about in a minute
you have two options you can activate
the font locally so that only these
this application fee sit or globally we
chose to have to give activated and
globally so as we quit this demo
application and go back to our simple
text application we should be able to
see anything here they are for us to see
the last thing I want to show you is
some of the formats and packaging that
Robin talked about that we now support
this or some of these are of course work
in progress so let me just show you some
of the the fonts that we're in that
activate demo fonts that I just
activated this font right here are
windows truetype fonts in fact I
downloaded this from the Microsoft
website and our standard to type data
for font so no resources whatsoever in
here as a fan piece you name it this one
here is an open type font a Japanese
opentype font so I'll go ahead and make
use of them Oh before I forget notice
also if I go back to my version of
simple text this font right here are
both of them are PostScript fonts there
is no ATM installed on this system this
is part of the of the mac OS system now
Mac os10 system so let me go back and
show you some of these fonts this is the
true type font from Microsoft so it does
operate so we can see it and now I can
go ahead and try that Japanese opentype
font excuse my Japanese so for you'll
come out right
here we go and with that I'll hand it
back to Robin and she'll talk some more
about all these wonderful api's that
i've been using here for the demo thank
you thanks Julia so let me reiterate at
this point the key point of this session
is that on Mac os10 we've completed the
transmission to the 80s font
architecture as julio mentioned the
resource manager is not really in the
picture anymore now ApS organizes the
font data in a two-tier hierarchy
consisting of font families and fonts a
font essentially represents a component
of a font family that is differentiated
by stylistic variation or stress like
italic or weight like bold the font
family is a reference to a collection of
fonts with the same design
characteristics this is kind of a
definition that most of you are probably
familiar with in terms of computing and
displaying text on on a computer so this
font family reference it's compatible
with the routines of the font manager in
quick draw text and may be used wherever
a standard quick 12 on identifiers from
the older days including the text font
function that you're familiar with in
quick draw and the TX font field within
the quick draw graphics port however it
cannot be used to access information
from a fon V or fond resource handle
through the resource manager routines in
addition a font family reference does
not imply a particular script system nor
can it be mapped through some arithmetic
magic to a
a particular character encoding as was
true in the past each component font
associated with the font family is
identified by an opaque reference to a
single object registered with the font
database this font reference consists of
the individual outline and bitmap fonts
that form in combination the font family
within the 80s function of programming
interface there are also compatibility
routines that lets you map one of these
newer references or at least the font
reference to an old style font family ID
and a traditional quick draw style style
bit set many of the features that I'll
be describing in this section are
implemented already in the extended
programming interface of the font
manager that was introduced with mac OS
9 point 0 and the first release of
carbon lib Mac os10 particularly if
you're going to be working with within
an environment that's based on the
courts graphic system like the app kid
you have the option of linking directly
to the new hgf framework this is where
the actual implementation of HS resides
on Mac OS 10
now there are four basic tasks that the
programming interface needs to provide
and this is available again on carbon
Liz and Mac OS mine within the font
manager and I'm a quest pan through the
80s framework they consist of the
ability to enumerate or search for font
families and farms accessing information
and data contained within the font
families and fonts and a set of database
related routines the main one being the
ability to activate and deactivate fun
and finally we have an implementation of
a basic font menu as Julio showed you
earlier that replaces the append res
menu implementation that was very
resource manager centric so as for
enumeration these routines again allow
you to iterate and search for font
families and fonts using a model that
thread safe and compatible with the
pre-emptive multitasking environment of
Mac OS 10 for routines are usually
provided there's one to create a font or
font family iterator object that
maintains the state necessary for
high-quality data there's a function to
iterate to the next item and is one to
reset the state of the font object I'm
the iterator object and once who
disposes the iterator once you're done
one additional feature that we provide
on the 80s framework is a utility
function that's similar to what you see
in the core foundation collections
library essentially it's the HS font
apply function it wraps everything up so
you don't have to deal with iterators
directly and you can simply pass in a
callback routine that's applied or
called for each item that's iterated
now here's how you create an iterator to
step through all of the fonts accessible
to your application it's essentially
wrapped where they create and dispose
function within it there's a inner loop
that iterates through all of all of the
fonts it returns a font reference that
you can use with any of the accessors
functions within the library now for the
access routines what you want to avoid
doing is using the resource manager
routines to access the data stored in
the traditional font suitcase files
these resources include the fonz the fon
tisa fonts nfm tees sfn tees and LW
sends a whole outfit troupe of resources
the resource based semantics of the old
font manager will still be available
because we didn't blow away the old
research manager routines and you'll be
able to return some values but it will
not be set up the way you're used to
with the system resource chain and all
the fonts available globally instead
what you want to do is use the iterator
and the apply functions and also use the
atf accessor functions that are also
available in a slightly different form
within the extended font manager in
terms of the interaction between the
font manager in the graphic system one
thing you should avoid doing is
depending on FM swap font and the
traditional resource-based font manager
data structures to access information
such as metrics and other metadata about
the fonts an example of this on Mac OS
10 is within the FM output structure
there is a font handle field that
currently is going to be set to nil in
most cases since a lot of this font data
is not going to reside within a resource
handle there are other data structures
that you're probably familiar with that
also have similar resource handle
pointers or handles to resources that
are probably going to be set to nil or
will definitely be set to million
most all of these cases the way you get
around is of course is to use the
accessor function that we provide
through 80s and through the extended
font manager they are set up so that
you'll be able to access information
that you would normally have gone to a
faun directly or to the font handle to
retrieve this information and we're
currently working with the various
graphic systems and the teams for the
courts and quick trial graphic systems
to integrate these font family and font
references into the system as accessors
so you won't have to do any sort of
conversion back and forth you can just
use these natively within those those
components I'll say this one more time
don't use the research manager for
activation and deactivation people in
the past have patched the resource
manager and font manager to get the work
done they have intimate knowledge about
the way the resource chain is set up and
how fonts are inserted and removed from
that chain that will no longer work as
of carbon live one point 0 and Mac OS 9
point 0 and on Mac OS 10 we provide
functions that makes it so much easier
for you you should be using these we
have a whole suite of these there's you
know not just basic activation and
deactivation but also ways to pass in
the information whether it's a file or
within memory one additional thing that
I like to explain is we also provide a
mechanism for notification it's very
simple in the this first release but
essentially consists of a generation
seed value it's a global value that
stores in the ATF server that gets
updated whenever anything happens to
change the state of the font database
this means any operation that can add
delete or even modify the fonts or font
families that are stored in the database
will trigger a change or an update to
this seed value and also any font family
or font that happens we touch within a
particular transaction will be tagged
with the current value of the generation
see so there are excessive functions
that allow you to retrieve this
information and compare it against a
cash value that you store within your
application to see what happens to the
database as time goes on this provides
the core functionality for the way the
updated font menu has been working so on
Mac OS 10 and Julio described earlier
you cannot embed a font in the resource
fork of your application and assume that
it's automatically registered with the
font manager when the application is
launched instead what you want to do is
you want to locate some predefined place
if you've actually carbonized your
application already and have one of
those packages that Julio's show to you
one of those apps directories then you
can use the CF bundle routines that are
available in core foundation to actually
locate one of the particular sub folders
where you can place your fonts that's
carried around with the application
whenever user copies it and task that
particular piece of information the
location as a file spec or a file ref or
even a pathname to the 80s routines to
activate the fonts contained within it
from that with the HTS framework you'll
be able to use a opaque container
reference to find the fonts that are
available or that were registered with
the database from within that container
or that file or memory location even one
thing I should note that Julio mentioned
earlier he actually stole some of my
thunder was that we have the ability
when activate when activating this
particular container to determine the
context whether it's local to the
application or global and system-wide
and so that's going to be one of the
parameters that you'll be able to pass
in the default behavior of course is to
make it local to the application and
safe so that when an application is
normally shut down or crashes even those
fonts will be removed from the system
the final task that the programming
interface provides or enables you to do
is a basic font menu I think I'll say
this one more time don't use the
resource manager base crew teams to do
this instead what you'll use are a
standard set of functions that were
distributed as a carbon with one point o
in the menu manager to create this basic
font menu and that's actually what
coolio was using within his ye simple
text that he was demoing so they provide
just a few functions that allow you to
create and dispose of a standard menu to
update it automatically based on this
generation feed and the current state of
the font database and one key item since
the implementation is radically
different or it is different anyway from
the old append res menu menu we provided
a function that allows you to map a user
selection to one of these new font
family or font references so here's real
quick how you'd actually create one of
the basic font menus it's almost
identical to the old append res menu
except for the fact that if you look
down below there's a hierarchical font
menu option so if you pass that in
you'll actually get one of the fancy new
hierarchical menus it's not spectacular
but it gets the job done if you wanted
to you can actually implement your own
version of a font menu using the
standard access sir and iterator
functions now this is what's more
interesting so given one of these
hierarchical menus which is different
from the old attend res menu style where
you can simply take the item text and
use the quick-draw routine get s none to
map it back to an ID that you could pass
through the quick trial graphic system
instead we provide you this function get
font font family from any selection that
takes the menu handle in the item that
was selected and maps it back to a
reference
and a standard quick-draw style that
then you can use with quick draw so one
of the benefits of this is that in the
future we could change the
implementation so that the menu items
are no longer a standard quick draw font
name we could actually make it so that
they're customizable or we can make it
possible to have both a postscript in a
truetype version of helvetica presence
in the same font menu and allow users to
distinguish between them and use them as
they want so it's a wrap is up I'll say
this one more time don't use the
resource manager to do your font
management begin developing to the new
extended font manager programming
interface that's available with carbon
also as of DP for you'll be able to
preview the programming interface that
we have in mind for the 80s framework
now this is a caveat on DP for you won't
be able to link against these functions
and you won't be able to use them just
take a look at the header file it's
called ACS font H and it's included
within the 80s framework itself if you
know the structure of the new framework
hierarchy basically each of them is a
modular package that represents a
component in system with headers that
are included within that package so
again preview those interfaces and see
what's up what additional features will
be providing and exposing through the
80s architecture here are a couple other
sessions that you might be interested in
the the text session already happened
earlier this morning and a lot of you
might have already gone but hopefully
I'm not sure about this that they'll
have some sort of streaming capability
or something to review the lecture
there's also the courts session on
Friday that you'll be interested in this
goes more into the graphic side of
things and it's specific to of course
the court system and finally on Friday
also there's the traditional
international and text feedback form
that i'll be i'll probably be at and so
will my colleagues and you can talk
about all kinds of other related topics
in the text field on the web you don't
want to get up and talking in a meeting
here at WWDC you can actually go and
take a look at the text and
international website for our DTS
technical documentation and I'll give a
plug to our fellow group in the in the
Apple font group which actually creates
the fonts that we ship on the system and
the tools and utilities that are used to
develop them and the final quote from
Willy Wonka invention is ninety-three
percent perspiration six percent
electricity four percent evaporation and
two percent butterscotch Ripple think of
it this way we've already gone through
all the perspiration for you so one
additional set of changes to your
applications and your utilities will
give you that extra magic that you'll
see from our chocolate factory thank you
very much
[Applause]